>>ON THIS EDITION FOR SATURDAY
AUGUST 23: ISIS GAINS MORE
CONTROL IN SYRIA AS THE UNITED
STATES WEIGHS MILITARY OPTIONS;
TENSIONS BETWEEN UKRAINE AND
RUSSIA CONTINUE TO RISE; AND IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE
ACCURACY OF BACKGROUND CHECKS
DESIGNED TO KEEP THE WORKPLACE
SAFE.
>> I’M THINKING, THIS IS NOT
RIGHT.
YOU GUYS HAVE MADE A MAJOR
MISTAKE, AND THIS NEEDS TO BE
FIXED.
>>NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN TONIGHT WITH SYRIA,
WHERE THE EXTREMIST MILITANT
GROUP ISIS HAS INCREASED ITS
CONTROL IN PARTS OF THAT COUNTRY
AND IN NEIGHBORING IRAQ.
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT CONTINUES
TO BATTLE THE MILITANTS, WHO
HAVE TAKEN CONTROL OF THREE
MILITARY BASES IN RECENT WEEKS.
LATE THIS WEEK, THE GOVERNMENT
SENT IN REINFORCEMENTS TO
MAINTAIN CONTROL OF THE TABQA
AIR BASE IN EASTERN SYRIA, THE
GOVERNMENT’S LAST STRONGHOLD IN
THE REGION.
AFTER ISIS RELEASED A VIDEO ON
TUESDAY SHOWING THE BEHEADING OF
AMERICAN JOURNALIST JAMES FOLEY,
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ANNOUNCED THAT IT IS
RECONSIDERING ITS MILITARY
STRATEGY, INCLUDING THE
POSSIBILITY OF AIR STRIKES IN
SYRIA.
THIS FOLLOWING A NEW UNITED
NATIONS REPORT WHICH PUTS THE
DEATH TOLL FROM THE CONFLICT IN
SYRIA AT MORE THAN 191,000.
IN THE LAST YEAR, THE NUMBER OF
CASUALTIES HAS MORE THAN
DOUBLED.
FOR SOME ANALYSIS OF THE SYRIAN
SITUATION AS THE UNITED STATES
CONSIDERS ITS OPTIONS AGAINST
ISIS, WE ARE JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON BY DOUGLAS OLLIVANT.
HE IS A SENIOR NATIONAL SECURITY
STUDIES FELLOW AT THE NEW
AMERICA FOUNDATION AND A PARTNER
AT MANTID INTERNATIONAL.
DOUG, LET ME START WITH THAT
U.N. REPORT-- 191,000 DEAD.
JUST TO PUT THAT IN PERSPECTIVE,
THAT’S THE ENTIRE POPULATION OF
SALT LAKE CITY GONE.
>> SYRIA JUST CONTINUES TO
BLEED.
THE CIVIL WAR GOES ON AND ON,
NEW REINFORCEMENTS SEEM TO BE
COMING TO EACH SIDE, AND THERE
DOES SEEM TO BE NO END IN SIGHT.
IT’S A CONTINUING HUMANITARIAN
DISASTER.
>> Sreenivasan: AND SO, HOW
SIGNIFICANT IS IT IF THEY GAIN
CONTROL OF THIS AIRBASE?
>> ANY TIME YOU LOSE A PIECE OF
INFRASTRUCTURE, IT’S VERY
SERIOUS.
AND THIS APPEARS TO BE THE
GOVERNMENT’S REAL LAST
STRONGHOLD IN THE EAST, AND
THEY’RE DIRECTLY CONFRONTING
ISIS FOR CONTROL OF THIS KEY
TERRAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT KIND OF
CONTROL DOES ISIS HAVE IN THE
ENTIRE COUNTRY?
IS IT BASICALLY, THE ENTIRE
NORTHERN END THEY’VE TAKEN
CONTROL OVER, SIMILAR TO IRAQ?
>> WELL, THEY CERTAINLY HAVE
LOOSE CONTROL OVER MUCH OF THE
NORTHEASTERN PART, EVERYTHING
BETWEEN THE REGIME AND THE KURDS
WITH OCCASIONAL SMATTERINGS OF
FREE SYRIAN ARMY CONTROLLED
AREAS AND ISLAMIC FRONT
CONTROLLED AREAS.
BUT IN SHORT, THEY HAVE SOME
CONTIGUOUS TERRITORY IN SYRIA
THAT ADJOINS WHAT THEY
CONTROL IN IRAQ.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE SOME
OF THE OPTIONS HERE FOR THE
U.S.?
AIR STRIKES HAVE BEEN
SOMETHING THAT’S BEEN
CONSIDERED.
WE’RE HEARING CONVERSATIONS OF
TRYING TO ASK CONGRESS FOR THE
AUTHORIZATION OF UNLIMITED USES
OF FORCE.
>> I THINK AS THE ADMINISTRATION
LOOKS AT THE PROBLEM AS A WHOLE,
THE ISIS THREAT IN BOTH IRAQ AND
SYRIA, YOU START TO REALIZE THAT
IF YOU ONLY ATTACK THEM IN IRAQ
AND LEAVE THEM A SAFE HAVEN IN
SYRIA, THAT’S JUST NOT GOING TO
WORK.
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE PRECEDENCE FOR
THIS.
THE TALIBAN AND HAQQANIS HAVING
THEIR SAFE HAVENS IN PAKISTAN,
AND, GOING BACK FURTHER, THE
VIET CONG WITH THEIR SAFE HAVENS
IN CAMBODIA.
IF YOU JUST STRIKE THEM ON ONE
SIDE OF THE BORDER AND LEAVE
THEM A PLACE WHERE THEY CAN REST
AND REFIT AND BE SAFE, YOUR
CHANCE OF SUCCESS ARE VERY SLIM.
>> Sreenivasan: YESTERDAY, BEN
RHODES MADE THIS QUOTE "WE’RE
NOT GOING TO BE RESTRICTED BY
BORDERS," WHICH IS A FAIRLY
AGGRESSIVE FOREIGN POLICY
STANCE.
>> THAT’S CERTAINLY THE FIRST
TIME WE’VE HEARD THAT, AND I
THINK THE ADMINISTRATION IS
STARTING TO RECALCULATE EXACTLY
WHAT’S INVOLVED IN SOME OF ITS
INTERNAL PREFERENCES IT MAY HAVE
TO OVERCOME TO EFFECTIVELY
CONFRONT THE ISIS THREAT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND HERE’S HOW
IT GETS A LITTLE TRICKY IN THE
MIDDLE EAST IN THE SENSE THAT
LAST YEAR, THERE WASN’T ENOUGH
SUPPORT BY THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY TO GO AFTER THE ASSAD
REGIME.
AND NOW, IF WE ESSENTIALLY
ATTACK AN ENEMY OF OUR ENEMY,
ARE WE ESSENTIALLY HELPING
BASHAR AL-ASSAD?
>> THE SHORT ANSWER IS YES,
AND THAT’S WHAT MAKES THIS SO
COMPLICATED.
THIS IS WHY WE’VE NOT STRUCK
ISIS IN SYRIA AS NO ONE HAS
WANTED TO GIVE EVEN THE
APPEARANCE OF GIVING AID AND
SUPPORT TO THE ASSAD REGIME.
BUT I THINK WE’RE NOW COMING TO
A RELUCTANT ACCEPTANCE OF THE
FACT THAT AS BAD AS THE ASSAD
REGIME IS-- AND NO ONE IS
DOWNPLAYING HOW AWFUL THE ASSAD
REGIME IS-- THE ISIS THREAT IS
BOTH WORSE AND A MORE REAL
DANGER TO THE UNITED STATES AND
ITS INTERESTS.
>> Sreenivasan: DOUGLAS
OLLIVANT JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: TENSIONS
CONTINUE TO MOUNT IN THE RUSSIA-
UKRAINE CRISIS AS 227 TRUCKS
FROM A RUSSIAN AID CONVOY
DEPARTED UKRAINE TODAY AND
RETURNED TO RUSSIA.
THE CONVOY ENTERED UKRAINE ON
FRIDAY THROUGH A REBEL-HELD
BORDER, A MOVE THE UKRAINIAN
GOVERNMENT CALLED AN ACT OF
INVASION.
THE MISSION OF THE CONVOY HAS
BEEN CONSISTENTLY DISPUTED.
IN QUESTION: WHAT THE TRUCKS
CONTAINED, AND IF THEY ACTUALLY
DELIVERED ANY HUMANITARIAN AID
TO THE REBEL-HELD CITY OF
LUHANSK.
ON FRIDAY, NATO SAID IT HAD
EVIDENCE THAT RUSSIAN TROOPS ARE
OPERATING INSIDE UKRAINE, AN
ACCUSATION THAT MOSCOW’S
AMBASSADOR TO THE U.N. DENIED.
AS GOVERNMENT FORCES CONTINUED
THEIR FIGHT TO RECLAIM THE
REBEL-HELD CITY OF DONETSK,
UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT PETRO
POROSHENKO MET WITH GERMAN
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL TODAY
IN KIEV.
MERKEL MADE THE TRIP AS A SHOW
OF SUPPORT FOR UKRAINE AND TO
URGE A PEACEFUL POLITICAL
SOLUTION TO THE CRISIS.
PRESIDENT PETRO POROSHENKO IS
SET TO MEET WITH RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN IN
MINSK ON TUESDAY FOR THEIR FIRST
ENCOUNTER SINCE JUNE.
FOR MORE, WE’RE JOINED BY STEVE
SESTANOVICH, A SENIOR FELLOW
FROM THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN
RELATIONS IN WASHINGTON, D.C.,
AND AUTHOR OF THE BOOK
"MAXIMALIST: AMERICA IN THE
WORLD FROM TRUMAN TO OBAMA."
SO, DID VLADIMIR PUTIN WIN IN
THE WORLD OF WAR OF PERCEPTION,
SO TO SPEAK, OR DID HE BACK
DOWN?
>> HE CERTAINLY DID SOMETHING
THAT WAS UNEXPECTED.
YESTERDAY, EVERYBODY WAS
PREDICTING THAT MAYBE WE WERE
FINALLY GOING OVER THE CLIFF TO
WAR, THAT THIS TIME THE RUSSIANS
WERE SERIOUS ABOUT AN INVASION,
AND ALL HELL WAS GOING TO BREAK
LOOSE.
TODAY, THEY ARE TAKING THE
TROOPS BACK, AND PUTIN HAS NOT
DONE THE BIG THING THAT HE
SEEMED TO BE THREATENING, WHICH
WAS TO MAKE HIS TROOPS, HIS MEN,
HIS TRUCKS A SHIELD FOR THE
SEPARATISTS IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
AND THE SAME LANDSCAPE IS REALLY
THERE NOW THAT WAS THERE BEFORE
THIS TRUCK CONVOY STORY.
PUTIN HAS TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
SUPPORT THE SEPARATISTS WHO ARE
BASICALLY GOING DOWN WITHOUT
OVER-INVOLVEMENT THAT WILL
EXCITE TOO MUCH OPPOSITION FROM
THE WEST AND EMBROIL HIM IN A
BIG MESS THAT HE WANTS TO STAY
OUT OF.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES THE
WEST DO ABOUT IT?
>> WELL, ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
THE WEST DID YESTERDAY, EUROPEAN
AND AMERICAN GOVERNMENTS WERE
REALLY LOUD IN THEIR CRITICISM
OF WHAT RUSSIA DID, AND MADE IT
CLEAR THAT THERE WAS GOING TO BE
NEW TROUBLE AHEAD IF HE
PERSISTED AND TRIED TO REALLY
INTERPOSE RUSSIAN FORCES INTO
THIS FIGHT IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
I THINK THAT’S GOT TO BE ONE OF
THE REASONS THAT MADE IT SUCH A
QUICK ROUNDTRIP FOR THESE TRUCKS
IN AND OUT OF LUHANSK.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES
PRESIDENT POROSHENKO DO ON
TUESDAY WHEN HE MEETS WITH
PUTIN?
>> WHAT HE SAID IS HE WANTS TO
TALK PEACE.
HE SAID WE’VE HAD ENOUGH OF WAR,
BUT HE’S LAID OUT SOME IMPORTANT
CONDITIONS IN HIS CONVERSATIONS
TODAY WITH CHANCELLOR MERKEL OF
GERMANY, WHO IS VISITING, GIVING
HIM A SHOW OF SUPPORT.
HE SAID HE WANTS TO HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO... FOR DIALOGUE
WITH EASTERN UKRAINIANS, BUT HE
WANTS ALL THE MERCENARIES OUT,
MEANING THE RUSSIAN MILITARY,
INTELLIGENCE OFFICERS AND
SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE WHO HAVE
SHOWN UP IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
HE IS DEMANDING THAT PUTIN PULL
BACK AND STOP MEDDLING, STOP THE
FLOW OF ARMS AND MEN INTO
EASTERN UKRAINE.
HE’S GOT THE WIND AT HIS BACK IN
SOME WAYS.
HE’S HAD A MILITARY OFFENSIVE IN
EASTERN UKRAINE THAT’S BEEN
PRETTY SUCCESSFUL.
SO, HE DEALS WITH PUTIN ON A
STRONGER FOOTING THAN MANY WOULD
HAVE EXPECTED A FEW WEEKS AGO.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT’S THE END
GAME FOR PUTIN HERE?
>> THIS IS A LITTLE HARD TO SAY.
THERE IS A RANGE OF
POSSIBILITIES.
HE COULD BE LOOKING AT A KIND OF
PERMANENT FERMENT IN EASTERN
UKRAINE, SOMETHING LIKE THE
SUPPORT THAT RUSSIA HAS GIVEN
OVER MANY YEARS TO SEPARATISTS
IN MOLDAVIA, IN GEORGIA AND
ELSEWHERE.
THAT’S NOT A REALLY GOOD OUTCOME
BECAUSE IT DOESN’T GET HIM OFF
THE HOOK WITH THE WEST.
IT MEANS A LOT OF THESE
SANCTIONS PROBABLY STAY IN PLACE
FOR A LONG TIME.
A BETTER OUTCOME WOULD BE ONE IN
WHICH HE GETS SOME KIND OF
CONCESSIONS FROM POROSHENKO
ABOUT THE STRUCTURE OF UKRAINIAN
POLITICS, SOME KIND OF
ACKNOWLEDGMENT THAT THERE HAS TO
BE DECENTRALIZATION.
POROSHENKO HAS OFFERED ALL OF
THAT, BUT HE HASN’T OFFERED TO
DO IT IN A WAY THAT LOOKS ENOUGH
TO PUTIN LIKE A REAL VICTORY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
STEVE SESTANOVICH, A SENIOR
FELLOW OF THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN
RELATIONS, JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C., THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: VIOLENCE IN GAZA
CONTINUED TODAY AS EGYPT CALLED
FOR PALESTINIANS AND ISRAELIS TO
RETURN TO PEACE TALKS.
THE REQUEST FROM EGYPT’S FOREIGN
MINISTRY CAME AFTER PALESTINIAN
PRESIDENT MAHMOUD ABBAS MET WITH
THE EGYPTIAN PRESIDENT IN CAIRO.
>> (translated): WHAT MATTERS
TO US NOW IS TO STOP THE FLOW OF
BLOOD AND TO STOP THESE ACTS
THAT CAUSE MORE SACRIFICES.
AND AS SOON AS IT STOPS, WE MUST
SUPPORT THE HUMANITARIAN EFFORT
AND RECONSTRUCTION OF GAZA.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT DECLINED TO COMMENT.
MORE THAN 2,000 PALESTINIANS AND
MORE THAN 60 ISRAELIS HAVE BEEN
KILLED SINCE THE CONFLICT IN
GAZA BEGAN ON JULY 8.
EGYPT IS REQUESTING AN OPEN-
ENDED CEASE FIRE.
THE IVORY COAST IS THE LATEST
COUNTRY IN WEST AFRICA TO CLOSE
ITS BORDERS TO PREVENT THE
SPREAD OF THE MOST DEADLY EBOLA
OUTBREAK ON RECORD.
THE IVORY COAST IS FLANKED BY
GUINEA AND LIBERIA, BOTH HIT
HARD BY THE OUTBREAKS.
NIGERIA REPORTED TWO NEW CASES
OF EBOLA YESTERDAY, AFFECTING
HEALTH WORKERS WHO HAD CARED FOR
AN AMERICAN THERE.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
SAYS THERE ARE MORE THAN 2,600
CONFIRMED OR SUSPECTED CASES AND
1,427 DEATHS SO FAR.
ALL OF THE CASES HAVE ORIGINATED
IN WEST AFRICA.
ON STATEN ISLAND TODAY,
THOUSANDS MARCHED TO SEEK
JUSTICE IN THE DEATH OF AN
UNARMED BLACK MAN WHO WAS KILLED
BY A WHITE POLICE OFFICER.
ON JULY 17, NEW YORK CITY POLICE
USED A CHOKEHOLD TO SUBDUE 43-
YEAR-OLD ERIC GARNER AFTER
DETAINING HIM FOR SELLING
CIGARETTES ILLEGALLY.
THE ASTHMATIC FATHER OF SIX DIED
AS A RESULT.
MANY MARCHERS CARRIED "HANDS-UP,
DON’T SHOOT" SIGNS, A REFERENCE
TO THE EVENTS IN FERGUSON,
MISSOURI, WHERE POLICE RECENTLY
KILLED ANOTHER UNARMED BLACK
MAN.
THE REVEREND AL SHARPTON ASKED
ATTENDEES TO REMAIN NONVIOLENT,
AND GARNER’S WIDOW ASKED THE
CROWD TO "GET JUSTICE" FOR HER
LATE HUSBAND.
SHARPTON HAS REPEATEDLY CALLED
THE DEATH OF GARNER AND EVENTS
IN FERGUSON A "DEFINING MOMENT"
FOR POLICING IN THE UNITED
STATES.
CALIFORNIA HAS BECOME THE
SEVENTH STATE TO ADDRESS
BACKLOGGED RAPE KITS.
LAWMAKERS PASSED A BILL
YESTERDAY WHICH WILL REQUIRE
HOSPITALS TO SUBMIT RAPE KITS TO
FORENSIC LABS WITHIN FIVE DAYS
OF OBTAINING D.N.A. EVIDENCE
FROM A SEXUAL ASSAULT VICTIM.
IT GIVES LAW ENFORCEMENT 20 DAYS
TO PROCESS THE EVIDENCE.
THIS COMES AFTER A RECENT AUDIT
FOUND A BACKLOG OF THOUSANDS OF
CASES IN CALIFORNIA.
ANOTHER BIG BANK, ANOTHER BIG
SETTLEMENT.
GOLDMAN SACHS WILL PAY $3.5
BILLION TO RESOLVE CLAIMS IT
KNOWINGLY SOLD FANNIE MAE AND
FREDDIE MAC RISKY MORTGAGE
BONDS.
AS PART OF THE DEAL, GOLDMAN
WILL BUY BACK SECURITIES IT SOLD
TO THE MORTGAGE GIANTS BETWEEN
2005 AND 2007 FOR $1 BILLION
MORE THAN THE BONDS ARE NOW
WORTH.
THIS LATEST SETTLEMENT COMES THE
DAY AFTER IT WAS ANNOUNCED THAT
BANK OF AMERICA WOULD BE PAYING
A RECORD $16.65 BILLION AS PART
OF AN AGREEMENT WITH FEDERAL
REGULATORS.
$7 BILLION OF THAT WILL GO
TOWARDS CONSUMER RELIEF.
>> Sreenivasan: NEWS CAME
YESTERDAY THAT A CYBER ATTACK
AGAINST A PRIVATE COMPANY,
U.S.I.S., THAT CONDUCTS
BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT EXPOSED DATA
ON 25,000 WORKERS, INCLUDING
SOME UNDERCOVER INVESTIGATORS.
THIS AFTER THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT CLAIMED EARLIER THIS
YEAR THAT THE COMPANY SUBMITTED
INCOMPLETE BACKGROUND CHECKS ON
MORE THAN 600,000 APPLICANTS.
IT’S THE LATEST PIECE OF BAD
NEWS FOR THE BACKGROUND CHECK
INDUSTRY, WHICH HAS COME UNDER
FIRE IN RECENT YEARS FOR
INACCURATE AND INCOMPLETE
REPORTS.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF EMPLOYERS
USE BACKGROUND CHECKS TO SCREEN
JOB APPLICANTS.
IN TONIGHT’S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE TAKE A LOOK AT THE STORY OF
ONE MAN WHO ALLEGES HIS
BACKGROUND CHECK CAME BACK WITH
MISTAKES AND COST HIM A
POTENTIAL JOB.
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT MEGAN
THOMPSON REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IN 2012, KEVIN A.
JONES APPLIED FOR A PART-TIME
JOB AS A DOORMAN IN NEW YORK
CITY.
HE WAS SOON CALLED IN FOR AN
INTERVIEW AT THE LARGE PROPERTY
MANAGEMENT COMPANY, HALSTEAD.
>> THE INTERVIEW ACTUALLY WENT
VERY WELL.
I HAND HIM MY RESUME, WE TALKED
ABOUT MY BACKGROUND, AND HE
BASICALLY ENDED THE INTERVIEW BY
SAYING, "WE WOULD LOVE TO HAVE
YOU WORK FOR US."
>> Reporter: GREAT NEWS FOR THE
DIVORCED 58-YEAR-OLD FATHER AND
PROFESSIONAL DRIVER WHO NEEDED
THE EXTRA MONEY TO HELP PAY
CHILD SUPPORT.
JONES FILLED OUT THE PAPERWORK,
SUBMITTED A DRUG TEST AND WAITED
TO HEAR WHEN HE COULD START.
INSTEAD, HE GOT A DIFFERENT KIND
OF CALL.
>> HUMAN RESOURCES SAID,
"THERE’S A PROBLEM WITH YOUR
BACKGROUND CHECK."
AND I SAID, "WHAT PROBLEM?"
"YEAH, THERE’S SOME CRIMINAL
STUFF GOING ON.
YOU NEED TO TALK TO THEM."
>> Reporter: IT TURNED OUT THE
BACKGROUND CHECK, CONDUCTED BY A
COMPANY NOW CALLED STERLING
BACKCHECK, SHOWED CONVICTIONS
FOR DRUNK DRIVING, ATTEMPTED
PETIT LARCENY AND FORGERY, AND
TWO STINTS IN JAIL.
A FEW DAYS LATER, JONES GOT A
LETTER IN THE MAIL SAYING UNLESS
HE COULD CLEAR THE MATTER UP,
HIS JOB OFFER WAS BEING REVOKED.
DO YOU HAVE ANY KIND OF CRIMINAL
HISTORY?
>> NONE.
NEVER.
EVER.
I WAS UPSET AND, OF COURSE,
EMBARRASSED, YOU KNOW.
I’M THINKING, THIS IS NOT RIGHT.
YOU GUYS HAVE MADE A MAJOR
MISTAKE, AND THIS NEEDS TO BE
FIXED.
>> Reporter: JONES SAYS AFTER
MONTHS OF PHONE CALLS WITH NO
RESOLUTION, HE HAD TO GET A
LAWYER TO SORT IT OUT.
BUT BY THEN, THE DAMAGE HAD BEEN
DONE.
SO, EARLIER THIS YEAR, HE BECAME
LEAD PLAINTIFF IN A CLASS ACTION
LAWSUIT AGAINST STERLING,
ACCUSING IT OF "SYSTEMATICALLY
FAILING TO USE REASONABLE
PROCEDURES" TO ENSURE ACCURACY
AS REQUIRED BY THE FEDERAL FAIR
CREDIT REPORTING ACT.
JONES ALSO SUED HIS WOULD-BE
EMPLOYERS, HALSTEAD AND BROWN
HARRIS STEVENS, ALLEGING THEY
DENIED HIM ADEQUATE OPPORTUNITY
TO DISPUTE THE REPORT, HIS RIGHT
UNDER FEDERAL LAW.
>> THESE COMPANIES ARE GETTING
THOUSANDS OF DISPUTES A YEAR
FROM CONSUMERS WHO ARE CLAIMING
THAT THERE’S AN INACCURACY ON
THEIR BACKGROUND CHECK.
>> Reporter: JIM FRANCIS IS ONE
OF JONES’ ATTORNEYS, WHOSE FIRM
SPECIALIZES IN CASES OF BOTCHED
BACKGROUND CHECKS.
>> IT’S A VERY, VERY TROUBLING
PROBLEM, AND ONE THAT I DON’T
SEE ABATING AT ANY TIME IN THE
NEAR FUTURE.
>> Reporter: SINCE 9/11, THE
BACKGROUND SCREENING INDUSTRY
HAS GROWN DRAMATICALLY.
TODAY, ALMOST 90% OF EMPLOYERS
SCREEN THEIR APPLICANTS, MEANING
MILLIONS OF CHECKS ARE DONE
EVERY YEAR.
THE IDEA IS TO AVOID PROBLEMS
AND KEEP THE WORKPLACE SAFE.
BUT CRITICS SAY THE SOURCES SOME
SCREENERS GET THEIR INFORMATION
FROM-- BULK DATABASES OR OTHER
COMPANIES CALLED DATA BROKERS--
CAN BE FLAWED.
AND THE SPEED AND VOLUME AT
WHICH IT’S ALL COMPILED CAN MEAN
MISTAKES ARE MADE, JOB
OPPORTUNITIES LOST AND
REPUTATIONS RUINED.
>> WHAT IS THE CAUSE OF IT IS A
BUSINESS MODEL FROM THE
BACKGROUND SCREENING INDUSTRY
THAT PROMOTES SPEED AND VOLUME
OF SALES OVER ACCURACY AND CARE.
>> Reporter: IN RECENT YEARS,
HUNDREDS OF LAWSUITS HAVE BEEN
FILED AGAINST BACKGROUND CHECK
COMPANIES, SOME RESULTING IN
MULTIMILLION-DOLLAR CLASS ACTION
SETTLEMENTS.
THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION HAS
ALSO STEPPED UP ITS ENFORCEMENT
IN THE LAST TWO YEARS, ISSUING
HEFTY FINES AGAINST MAJOR
SCREENERS AND DATA BROKERS.
WHAT’S MORE, THE BURDEN CAN FALL
ON THE JOB APPLICANT TO GET A
MISTAKE FIXED, AND MOST DON’T
KNOW WHERE TO BEGIN.
>> I WAS DISAGREEING VEHEMENTLY,
BUT THEY... THEY WEREN’T
LISTENING, AND... AND NO ONE WAS
HELPING.
IT WASN’T LIKE THERE WAS A
SUGGESTION, "WELL, WHY DON’T YOU
TRY THIS?," YOU KNOW.
>> I WENT AND I PULLED RECORD
NUMBER ONE.
>> Reporter: IN THE CASE OF HIS
CLIENT, KEVIN A. JONES, JIM
FRANCIS CONTACTED THE LOCAL
COURTHOUSES AND PULLED THE
ACTUAL RECORDS.
HE FOUND ALL THOSE CONVICTIONS
BELONGED TO ANOTHER MAN IN
UPSTATE NEW YORK WITH THE SAME
FIRST AND LAST NAME AND
BIRTHDAY.
BUT ALL THE RECORDS SHOWED THIS
MAN HAD A DIFFERENT MIDDLE
INITIAL, "M."
HE ALSO HAD COMPLETELY DIFFERENT
HOME ADDRESSES.
>> THERE WAS PLENTY OF
INFORMATION AVAILABLE IN THE
ACTUAL PUBLIC RECORD THAT WOULD
HAVE BEEN ABLE TO PROVE THAT HE
WAS NOT THE PERSON WHO WAS THE
SUBJECT OF THESE CRIMINAL
RECORDS, BUT THEY DIDN’T GET
THESE RECORDS.
>> Reporter: THERE IS NO CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT DATABASE THAT
CONTAINS CRIMINAL HISTORY
INFORMATION FROM THE THOUSANDS
OF LOCAL JURISDICTIONS ACROSS
THE U.S., AND FRANCIS SAYS THE
MASSIVE DATABASES BACKGROUND
SCREENERS COMPILE THEMSELVES OR
GET FROM OUTSIDE DATA BROKERS
CAN BE INCOMPLETE AND OUT OF
DATE.
>> YOU HAVE TO SEE THAT IF
THERE’S SOME INFORMATION THAT
DOESN’T MATCH, IF THERE ARE
MULTIPLE FIELDS THAT DON’T
MATCH, YOU HAVE TO ASK MORE
QUESTIONS.
>> Reporter: MANEESHA MITHAL IS
THE ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR OF THE
DIVISION OF PRIVACY AND IDENTITY
PROTECTION AT THE FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION, WHICH ENFORCES THE
FAIR CREDIT REPORTING ACT.
IT REQUIRES THAT BACKGROUND
SCREENERS USE "REASONABLE
PROCEDURES TO ASSURE MAXIMUM
POSSIBLE ACCURACY."
IT ALSO GUARANTEES A FREE COPY
OF THE BACKGROUND REPORT, AND
REQUIRES THE SCREENER TO
REINVESTIGATE IF A JOB APPLICANT
DISPUTES SOMETHING IN THEIR
REPORT.
>> IF YOU HAVE A SEX OFFENDER
APPLYING FOR A JOB AT A DAY
CARE, YOU DON’T WANT TO REQUIRE
NECESSARILY THAT EVERY PIECE OF
INFORMATION MATCHES BECAUSE YOU
WANT TO BE ABLE TO CATCH PEOPLE
WHO MIGHT HAVE A TRANSPOSED
MIDDLE INITIAL BUT ACTUALLY ARE
THE SEX OFFENDERS.
AT THE SAME TIME, YOU DON’T WANT
PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT SEX OFFENDERS
TO BE DENIED THAT JOB BASED ON
ERRONEOUS INFORMATION.
SO, WHAT WE’VE TOLD COMPANIES IS
THAT YOU HAVE TO HAVE REASONABLE
PROCEDURES.
YOU HAVE TO DO SOME DUE
DILIGENCE.
YOU HAVE TO DO SOME CHECKING.
>> Reporter: IS THERE ANY
REQUIREMENT THAT THESE
BACKGROUND SCREENING COMPANIES
HAVE TO REGISTER WITH ANYONE?
OR IS THERE ANY KIND OF NATIONAL
LIST OF THESE COMPANIES?
>> NO, THERE ISN’T.
>> Reporter: SO, WE DON’T KNOW
HOW MANY COM... OF THESE
COMPANIES ARE EVEN OUT THERE?
>> NO, WE DON’T.
AND I THINK THAT’S ONE OF THE
CHALLENGES.
>> Reporter: WE ASKED FOR A
STATEMENT FROM STERLING
BACKCHECK, THE COMPANY THAT
ISSUED KEVIN JONES’ BACKGROUND
REPORT.
IT DECLINED COMMENT.
BUT IN A COURT FILING, THE
COMPANY DENIED THE ALLEGATIONS
AND ANY LIABILITY TO JONES OR
OTHER PLAINTIFFS.
JONES’ WOULD-BE EMPLOYERS,
HALSTEAD AND BROWN HARRIS
STEVENS, SAID IN A STATEMENT
THEY ENGAGE AN INDEPENDENT,
THIRD PARTY PROVIDER TO COMPLETE
BACKGROUND CHECKS AND "IF THERE
WAS A CASE OF MISTAKEN IDENTITY
BY OUR SCREENING COMPANY, WE ARE
NONETHELESS SYMPATHETIC TO MR.
JONES’ SITUATION AND HAVE SO
INFORMED HIS COUNSEL.
WE SUPPORT THE FAIR CREDIT
REPORTING ACT AND BELIEVE THAT
WE ARE FULLY COMPLIANT WITH ITS
REQUIREMENTS."
>> CERTAINLY THE ONE OR TWO THAT
COME THROUGH THAT HA... MAY HAVE
A POTENTIAL ISSUE ARE THE ONES
THAT BECOME MORE NOTEWORTHY AND
NOTICEABLE.
WHAT YOU DON’T NECESSARILY HEAR
ABOUT ARE THE MILLIONS OF
SUCCESSFUL SCREENS THAT ARE
HAPPENING EACH AND EVERY DAY.
>> Reporter: MELISSA SORENSON IS
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
PROFESSIONAL BACKGROUND
SCREENERS, AN INDUSTRY GROUP
WITH ABOUT 700 MEMBERS,
INCLUDING MANY OF THE BIGGEST
SCREENING COMPANIES.
IT LAUNCHED ITS OWN
ACCREDITATION PROGRAM FOUR YEARS
AGO AND SAYS ABOUT 10% OF ITS
MEMBERS HAVE GONE THROUGH IT.
BUT SORENSON SAYS THERE IS NO
INFORMATION PUBLICLY AVAILABLE
ABOUT THE ACCURACY RATE IN THE
INDUSTRY.
>> FOR ALL OF OUR MEMBERS,
ACCURACY IS KEY TO THE PRODUCT
THAT THEY’RE PROVIDING.
IT’S KEY NOT ONLY BECAUSE IT’S
CRITICAL AND MANDATORY UNDER
FEDERAL LAW, BUT THEIR CUSTOMERS
DEMAND AN END PRODUCT THAT’S
ACCURATE AND THAT THEY CAN USE
IN MAKING A HIRING DECISION.
>> Reporter: SORENSEN SAYS IF A
SCREENER FINDS SOMETHING
QUESTIONABLE, THE FAIR CREDIT
REPORTING ACT REQUIRES IT EITHER
CHECK THE ORIGINAL SOURCE OR
GIVE NOTICE TO THE EMPLOYER AND
JOB APPLICANT.
SO, YOU’RE SAYING THAT THE
SCREENER CAN THEN JUST SEND A
LETTER TO THE EMPLOYER AND THE
CONSUMER SAYING, "HEY, WE FOUND
THIS."
I MEAN, HASN’T THE DAMAGE THEN
ALREADY BEEN DONE?
>> WITH THAT INITIAL NOTICE THAT
COMES OUT, YOU THEN HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY AS A CONSUMER TO
DISPUTE THAT INFORMATION.
>> Reporter: SORENSON SAYS
SCREENERS HAVE A DUTY TO
REINVESTIGATE IF A DISPUTE IS
MADE, BUT THERE ARE NO
REQUIREMENTS ABOUT WHAT A
REINVESTIGATION ENTAILS.
AND IF A JOB APPLICANT DOES GET
A MISTAKE FIXED, THAT
INFORMATION ISN’T NECESSARILY
SHARED AMONG THE OTHER
COMPANIES.
>> BACKGROUND SCREENING
COMPANIES OPERATE INDEPENDENTLY.
AND IT’S POSSIBLE THAT IF
SOMETHING CAME BACK ON A
BACKGROUND SCREEN FOR A
PARTICULAR INDIVIDUAL AND THEN
ANOTHER SCREENING COMPANY
PERFORMED A SCREEN, THE SAME
INFORMATION COULD SHOW UP.
>> Reporter: AND THAT’S EXACTLY
WHAT KEVIN JONES SAYS HE’S
WORRIED ABOUT.
>> IF IT HAPPENED ONCE, IT COULD
HAPPEN AGAIN.
IF... IT’S UNFORTUNATE TO FEEL
THAT WAY, BUT IT HAPPENED, SO
I... I HAVE TO FEEL THAT WAY.
>> Reporter: JONES IS NOW
WORKING FULL-TIME AND SAYS HE
HOPES HIS LAWSUITS WILL HELP
PREVENT THIS FROM HAPPENING TO
SOMEBODY ELSE.
HIS CASES ARE CURRENTLY PENDING
IN NEW YORK DISTRICT COURT.
>> SHOULD BACKGROUND CHECKS BE
USED TO REVIEW JOB APPLICANTS?
TAKE OUR POLL.
VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: MALALA YOUSAFZAI
BECAME A GLOBAL CRUSADER FOR
GIRL’S EDUCATION AFTER SHE WAS
SHOT IN THE HEAD BY THE TALIBAN
ON HER WAY HOME FROM SCHOOL IN
PAKISTAN IN 2012.
SINCE RECOVERING, THE 17-YEAR-
OLD HAS BEEN TRAVELING THE WORLD
ADVOCATING FOR THE MILLIONS OF
CHILDREN ACROSS THE GLOBE WHO
DON’T HAVE ACCESS TO EDUCATION.
I SAT DOWN WITH HER THIS WEEK
WHILE SHE WAS IN NEW YORK
PROMOTING THE RELEASE OF A NEW
EDITION OF HER BOOK, "I AM
MALALA," FOR YOUNG READERS.
HERE IS AN EXCERPT FROM THAT
CONVERSATION.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO YOUNG WOMEN
AND GIRLS IN DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
WHO HAVE THIS OPPORTUNITY?
HOW DO YOU INSPIRE THEM TO GET
THE SAME FIRE IN THE BELLY ABOUT
EDUCATION THAT YOU HAVE OR
PEOPLE FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
WHO HAVE NEVER SEEN IT HAVE?
>> SO THE FIRST THING IS THAT IN
THE DEVELOPING COUNTRY, THERE
ARE SO MANY CHILDREN, SO MANY
GIRLS WHO ARE RAISING THEIR
VOICES, WHO ARE SPEAKING UP FOR
EDUCATION, AND THEY WANT TO GO
TO SCHOOL.
THIS IS THEIR DREAM.
THEY DO NOT DREAM FOR AN iPAD
OR FOR A PLAYSTATION OR FOR AN
X-BOX.
THEIR ONLY DREAM IS JUST TO GO
TO SCHOOL.
AND HERE CHILDREN IN THE U.K.,
IN THE U.S.A., IN THE DEVELOPED
COUNTRIES, THEY HAVE GOT THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO GO TO GOOD
SCHOOLS AND THEY GET FREE
EDUCATION.
SO I THINK THEY SHOULD BE VERY
THANKFUL FOR IT.
BECAUSE WHEN I WENT TO KENYA, I
HEARD THAT THERE WERE SO MANY
GIRLS WHO ARE DEPRIVED OF
EDUCATION, AND ONLY ONE OUT OF
TEN GIRLS GET THE OPPORTUNITY TO
GO TO SCHOOL.
SO IT’S QUITE DIFFICULT IN MANY
COUNTRIES FOR GIRLS TO GO
FORWARD.
EVEN FOR BOYS, IT IS QUITE
DIFFICULT TO GO FORWARD
AND MAKE THEIR DREAMS COME TRUE
BECAUSE THEY ALSO WISH TO BECOME
DOCTORS, TO BECOME TEACHERS AND
ENGINEERS, BUT BECAUSE OF THE
DIFFICULTIES THEY CAN NOT
ACHIEVE THEIR DREAMS AND THEY
CANNOT BE WHAT THEY WANT TO BE.
SO HERE, IF YOU’VE GOT THIS GOOD
OPPORTUNITY, THEN YOU CAN
FULFILL YOUR DREAMS, AND YOU CAN
CONTRIBUTE TO A SOCIETY BY
BECOMING WHAT YOU REALLY WANT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY
TONIGHT, PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
ORDERED A REVIEW OF WEAPONS USED
BY STATE AND LOCAL POLICE
DEPARTMENTS WHICH OFTEN INCLUDE
MILITARY-GRADE EQUIPMENT
PROVIDED BY THE GOVERNMENT,
ACCORDING TO A SENIOR
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTS THE
PRESIDENT WAS AFFECTED BY
PICTURES OF HEAVILY ARMED POLICE
CLASHING WITH PROTESTERS IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
FROM THE PHILIPPINES, WILL A NEW
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE LAW
SLOW DOWN ONE OF ASIA’S HIGHEST
BIRTH RATES?
THAT’S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.